now in most cases turbulence
only drops you a couple of feet down
even though it might feel as if you're
falling from the top of the empire state
building
yeah you better buckle up if the
turbulence is strong enough for pilots
to ask flight attendants to sit down
the plane can go 10 to 20 feet down
the most extreme white knuckle
turbulence is super rare
but it can make the plane drop 100 feet
down
ride him cowboy the average cruising
altitude of most commercial airplanes is
only
seven percent of the distance to space
airplanes can trigger lightning really
when an aircraft is flying through a
cloud the friction creates static
electricity
it can cause a bolt of lightning luckily
it's not dangerous for modern planes
on average lightning strikes every
commercial jet
at least once a year shocking
on airplanes the captain sits in the
left seat
and the co-pilot in the right the
reasons for that are historical
one theory goes like this the first
european air forces were recruited from
cavalry officers they used to wear
swords on their left side
and mount horses from the left this way
they avoided getting their feet tangled
that's why later it was more familiar
for them to board the plane
from the left hopefully not well still
mounted on their horses
another theory involves trains the first
international air route connected london
and paris
and while performing this flight pilots
navigated by following the railroad
history has it that once
when the weather was especially bad two
planes collided
because both of them were flying over
the tracks after that
it was agreed each aircraft would fly to
one side of the railroad track on the
right
and the pilot had to sit on the left
side closer to the oncoming airplane
it helped them to estimate the needed
clearance alright
so it would want to sit in the left seat
if that's where the biggest danger is
um it doesn't say by the way these days
both seats have full control of the
plane and there are no regulations that
would specify
which seat the captain and the co-pilot
should occupy
maybe it's just rock paper scissors as
for helicopter pilots in command
they usually but not always sit on the
right
copters are more unstable than airplanes
that's why pilots prefer
not to let go of the control stick this
stick controls the helicopter's
direction and altitude
the control stick sits between the
pilot's knees and they use their right
hand to hold onto it
the pilot's left hand moves the lever
that changes the blade's pitch
and presses other buttons on the central
console
the fastest commercial airplane ever
produced
the concorde could fly at almost twice
the speed of sound
it held the record for the fastest
transatlantic flight
it took this speedy jet three hours to
get from new york's jfk
to london's heathrow an extra seat
behind the pilot and the co-pilot in the
cockpit
is for flight attendants during takeoff
and landing or
for inspectors who monitor the fly this
seat is also
called a jump seat because when you get
up from it
it folds up right away or in case of
trouble you can
jump out first not really modern planes
have a special system that detects
other aircraft mountains and different
solid
objects in their path ten miles away
from another plane
and a voice starts to chant traffic
traffic
five miles closer and the same voice
begins to give the pilots directions
turn right turn right and after the
pilots drink a lot of coffee
a chance bathroom bathroom
yeah i made that one up airplanes can
safely operate with one engine
even during takeoff and landing both
engines failing at the same time is
almost unheard of
but even then a plane wouldn't drop from
the sky like a rock
pilots would still have at least 20
minutes to find a suitable place to land
voyager was the first plane to fly
around the world without refueling or
stopping
it happened in 1986 the flight continued
for nine days
three minutes and 44 seconds bathroom
bathroom the average cruising altitude
is 35 000 feet
but if our planet was as big as a globe
planes would fly just one tenth of an
inch
off its surface just imagine the legroom
boeing 747 consists of more than 6
million
parts assembly required each of his
engines weighs almost
9 000 pounds two and a half times as
heavy as the average car
each one costs around eight to ten
million dollars
planes can land even if their wheels are
broken or the landing gear is stuck
then the pilots just skid the plane's
belly down the tarmac
if everything's done correctly such
landings are quite safe
according to somebody the first
powered flight ever took place in north
carolina
yay orville and wilbur had the right
stuff
the gasoline-powered biplane driven by
propeller
was in the air for 12 seconds and
covered the distance of 120 feet
and that's only half the distance of the
wingspan of the largest passenger
airliner these days
the airbus a380 has wings that spread
for more than 260 feet
a hard landing that makes your face turn
white isn't necessarily the sign of an
inexperienced pilot
in some conditions a gentle touchdown is
dangerous
for example when the runway is wet a
plane has to touch down
firmly this way it breaks the water
surface
and avoids hydroplaning a hard touchdown
is also necessary when the runway is too
short
it improves the plane's braking
capability
mercury isn't allowed on planes even a
tiny amount of this liquid metal can
damage the aluminum aircraft bodies are
made of
mercury eagerly combines with aluminum
then
it harms the protective layer that
prevents the metal from corrosion
by the way venus and mars are prohibited
too
the verdict is still out on your anus
the co-pilot is as experienced and
capable of flying a plane as the captain
it's a common situation when the captain
flies the plane to its destination
and the co-pilot drives it on the way
back
choosing a window seat you get an
opportunity to see how the airplane
wings
flex and flap they're designed to move
this way
if the wings were stiff they would snap
off once
turbulence hit the plane well that's
comforting
before takeoff and landing flight
attendants usually flip a small
switch on the bathroom door this
prevents it from flying open when it's
not supposed to
good thing with the same ease a flight
attendant can open the door when someone
is inside
at night pilots can't see other
airplanes clearly
and have to rely on electronics to make
it less confusing
every aircraft has a green light on its
right wing
and a red light on the left one it helps
other pilots to figure out which
direction the plane's facing
and where it's going and if you're going
to hit it
airplane constructors make the cabin
look more spacious by painting it white
its special wall structure also reflects
light which visually
expands the space the illumination
between the ceiling and overhead bins
makes the ceiling look higher all this
helps people with claustrophobia to deal
with being
in an enclosed space for hours
when an airplane has a wider entrance
and is bright inside
passengers believe their meals taste
better
and their seats are wider but the only
thing that's different is their
surroundings
limited amounts of oxygen on the plane
affects passengers mood
this makes most people get overly
emotional
about 41 percent of people admit to
having cried while watching an
in-flight movie and 55 percent
confess they feel more emotional when
they're flying
modern plane toilets are vacuum powered
yes they officially suck
when you flush negative air pressure
outside pulls everything that's inside
the bowl
into a holding tank usually in the tail
of the plane
one flush uses around a half a gallon of
water
the bd bd5 micro holds the guinness
world record for being the smallest
and lightest jet aircraft the plane can
seat one person and weighs 10 times less
than the average car
in the 1970s when the plane was produced
it cost about
2 500 dollars
if you're a nervous flyer pick a seat in
the middle of the cabin if possible
turbulence mostly affects the front and
rear parts of the cabin
the middle section which is over the
wings doesn't get shaken all that much
bathroom the pressurized air in the
passenger cabin
is as dry as in the sahara desert it has
about
twenty percent humidity a humidifier
could solve this problem by adding some
moisture
but it would be an extra load and cost
airlines tons of money
plus the aircraft body is mostly made of
aluminum and other metals
humid air might lead to corrosion pilots
are tested every six to eight months
they use flight simulators and practice
all kinds of emergencies
after that examiners assess them safety
and technical tests and medical
examination
also take place regularly the boeing
747-8
one of the world's largest commercial
airplanes has enough
electrical capacity to power almost half
a million flat screen tvs
and the first airline that offered its
customers online check-in
was alaska airlines that happened in
in the beginning this system was
available to a limited number of
passengers
and worked only for selected flights and
now
everyone who is flying has the same
opportunity to lose their electronic
boarding passes